Capabilities
============

Capabilities are a familiar abstraction used throughout the SmartThings platform.  However, this document is not meant
to be an exhaustive look at capabilities and instead will focus on the interaction with capabilities from within the lua
code environment.  There are two basic ways that you will interact with capabilities when supporting a device, one is
generating events, and one is receiving commands.  The sections below will explain these in more detail.

Capability Events
+++++++++++++++++

Events can be thought of as one of the outputs of your driver.  The most common use case here is receiving a message
from the device informing your driver of a change of state, and converting that change of state to a capability
attribute state update so it can propagate throughout the system and be used in rules and apps.  Exactly what
information is necessary for a capability event is dependent on the capability and attribute that you are generating it
for and you should look at the capability specific documentation to understand the specifics, but in most cases, a
single "value" update is enough.  However, there is some additional information the system needs to be able to handle
the event correctly, namely, the device and component that the event is for.  More in depth discussion of device
profiles and components can be found elsewhere, but within edge device drivers, most of you event generation can be done
using helper methods defined on the :doc:`device <device>` object.  See that page for more in depth discussion, but a
simple example would be:

.. code-block:: lua

    my_device:emit_event(capabilities.switch.switch.on())
    my_multi_component_device.profile.components["my_component_name"]:emit_event(capabilities.switch.switch.on())


Both of these ``emit_event`` functions are taking an argument that represents the capability event values other than
those related to the device, and we will describe this process in more detail.

There is a single top level capability file that you can include in your driver to gain access to these helper methods,
and can be pulled in with ``reqiure "st.capabilities"``.  The module table that is returned will have a table entry
under each capability ID representing that capability (e.g. the ``capabilities.switch`` in the example above).  This is
itself a lua table with some methods provided to make building the events you want easier.

Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~

Most capabilities will have several attributes which will track the current state of the device.  Changing one of these
attributes is one of the most common actions you will want to do as a part of your driver.  The syntax for doing so is
by using the ``_call`` function on the attribute table on the capability, and passing in the value you want for the
event.

.. code-block:: lua

    local capabilities = require "st.capabilities"
    local event_state = capabilities.switchLevel.level(50)


The above would create the state part of the event (i.e. the part independent of the device it is tied to).  This case
covers the simplest form of event generation and will work for the vast majority of attributes, but complexity can come
into place depending on the "schema" of the attribute, which defines it's type, as well as potentially additional
augmenting information (unit for example).

Another very common type for attributes is an ``enum``.  The enum type is basically just a string value, but restricted
to a specific set of options.  Because this is such a common capability type, and having just arbitrary strings in the
code can be undesirable, we have provided an additional helper option for generating those events.

.. code-block:: lua

    local capabilities = require "st.capabilities"
    local event_state = capabilities.switch.switch.on()


That is ``capabilities.<capability_id>.<attribute_name>.<enum_value>()`` which is functionally equivalent to
``capabilties.<capability_id>.<attribute_name>("<enum_value>")``.  For state events that are more complicated, you can
define the additional values by passing a table fully describing the event.

.. code-block:: lua

    local capabilities = require "st.capabilities"
    local event_state = capabilities.temperatureMeasurement.temperature({ value = 50, unit = "C" })


What exactly is necessary, is again defined within the schema.  Also, of note, the earlier examples with a single value
passed in are equivalent to passing in a table with a single key "value" set to the arg.

It should also be noted that the capability definitions include schemas defining the required and allowed values for
attributes, and these will be enforced on event generation.  That is, for something like ``level`` for ``switchLevel``
it defines a maximum value of 100 and a minimum of 0.  Thus, if an event is attempted to be generated with a value of
150 an error will be raised.


Capability Commands
+++++++++++++++++++

The other main component of capabilities are the commands they support.  Commands will typically be originated from
either the mobile app, or a rule.  These can be "received" on the capability channel.  If you use the built in driver
constructions it will automatically register a handler for these commands which can be used to convert the capability
command into a protocol message to the device.


capability_handlers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All Drivers regardless of the protocol supported can have a list of ``capability_handlers`` defined as a part of the
driver.  The structure needed is fairly straightforward, it is simply a nested table keying on capability ID, then
command name, to point to the function that will handle it.  Following is an example from a Zigbee driver to support
switch and switchLevel commands.

.. code-block:: lua

    my_driver.capability_handlers = {
        [capabilities.switch.ID] = {
            [capabilities.switch.commands.on.NAME] = switch_defaults.on,
            [capabilities.switch.commands.off.NAME] = switch_defaults.off
        },
        [capabilities.switchLevel.ID] = {
            [capabilities.switchLevel.commands.setLevel] = switch_level_defaults.set_level
        },
    }


These should be added to the driver template that is passed into the ``Driver.init`` function via the ``Driver()`` call.
The signature of each of these handlers should be ``handler(driver, device, capability_command)``.  The capability
command will have the following structure

.. code-block:: lua

    local setLevelCommand={
      capability="switchLevel",
      command="setLevel",
      args={
        level=57,
        rate=0,
      },
      positional_args={
        57,
        0,
      },
    }


Note that there are actually 2 versions of the command arguments here, both positional and named.  Per the capability
specification, all arguments are positional arguments.  However, because names are included with them in the definition
we map the args to their name in a table for convenience of use, and to help the code to be more self documenting.


Custom Capabilities
+++++++++++++++++++

Docs to come with full custom capability support.
